JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And I'm Hari
Sreenivasan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
tonight:
a major shift in the military.
The Pentagon
lifts the ban to allow
transgender people
to openly serve in the armed
forces.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Then: As the
death toll
from the Istanbul attack rises,
Turkey arrests
13 people with suspected links
to ISIS and
identifies the bombers as
foreign nationalists.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Also ahead this
Thursday, I
sit down with the U.S.
ambassador to the United
Nations, Samantha Power, to talk
about the
plight of millions of refugees
and fears of
what taking them in may lead to.
SAMANTHA POWER, U.S. Ambassador
to the United
Nations: Some of the fears are
warranted.
You know, people are wondering,
could ISIL
potentially, you know, sneak
through? And
we have to answer those fears.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All that and
more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: From the Pentagon
today, a
sweeping declaration:
Transgender people are
no longer barred from serving
openly in the
military.
Secretary of Defense Ash Carter
defended the
decision on both moral and
practical grounds.
ASHTON CARTER, U.S. Defense
Secretary: We
have reason to be proud today of
what this
will mean for our military,
because it's the
right thing to do, and it's
another step in
ensuring that we continue to
recruit and retain
the most qualified people. And
good people
are the key to the best military
in the world.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We will explore
the effects
of today's announcement right
after the news
summary.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In the day's
other news:
Taliban attackers in Afghanistan
killed 37
people and wounded 40 in a
double suicide
bombing. They struck in Paghman
district,
about 12 miles to the west of
Kabul. The first
bomber targeted two buses
carrying police
trainees. The second blew
himself up when
people rushed in to help the
victims.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Two more people
have died as
a result of their wounds from
Tuesday's airport
bombings in Istanbul, Turkey.
That pushes
the total to 44 dead, with
dozens more hospitalized.
Police also said today that the
three suicide
bombers were from Russia and two
of the former
Soviet republics. We will have a
full report
later in the program.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Meanwhile,
airstrikes in
Iraq devastated two Islamic
State convoys
trying to escape Fallujah this
week. Aerial
video from Iraq's Defense
Ministry showed
vehicles as they came under
attack by Iraqi
helicopters and U.S. coalition
warplanes.
The attacks began Tuesday night.
Iraqi forces
have now recaptured most of
Fallujah from
ISIS.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The U.N.
Children's Fund reports
the war with ISIS in Iraq has
taken a terrible
toll on children. One in five,
or more than
3.5 million kids, are classified
at serious
risk of death, injury, sexual
abuse or being
forced to fight.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In Britain,
more fallout
today from the Brexit vote.
Former London
Mayor Boris Johnson dropped out
of the race
to be prime minister. His
support melted away
after a key conservative party
ally, Michael
Gove, announced his own
candidacy. Johnson
had been a leader of the
campaign to quit
the European Union. He says his
focus now
will be on making the
transition.
BORIS JOHNSON, Former Mayor of
London: My
role will be to give every
possible support
to the next conservative
administration to
make sure that we properly
fulfill the mandate
of the people that was delivered
at the referendum
and to champion the agenda I
believe in.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Current Prime
Minister David
Cameron is stepping down after
losing the
fight to keep Britain in the
European Union.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A new Palestinian
stabbing
attack today left a 13-year-old
Israeli girl
dead, who was also an American
citizen. Israeli
police say a man broke into the
girl's home
in a West Bank settlement and
knifed her as
she slept. He also wounded a
guard, before
being fatally shot. Another
Palestinian was
killed later after he stabbed
and wounded
two Israelis in the coastal city
of Netanya.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Back in this
country, the
Navy blamed weak leadership and
bad judgment
for Iran's capture of 10 U.S.
sailors last
January. Their two boats
mistakenly entered
Iranian waters, and they spent
15 hours in
Iranian captivity, before being
released.
The Navy says several violated
military rules
by cooperating with their
captors.
JUDY WOODRUFF: U.S. Attorney
General Loretta
Lynch is fending off questions
about a meeting
with former President Bill
Clinton. Their
paths crossed Monday at an
airport in Phoenix
at a time when the FBI is
investigating Hillary
Clinton's e-mail practices as
secretary of
state.
White House spokesman Josh
Earnest defended
Lynch today without specifically
saying if
the meeting was proper.
JOSH EARNEST, White House Press
Secretary:
She certainly understands that
investigations
should be conducted free of
political interference
and consistent with the facts.
Investigators
should be guided by the facts
and by evidence,
and that's ultimately what
should support
their conclusions.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The attorney
general says she
and the former questioned
president discussed
families and friends, but none
of the issues
involving his wife, the
presumptive Democratic
presidential nominee.
HARI SREENIVASAN: House Speaker
Paul Ryan
is promising a vote next week on
barring terror
suspects from buying guns. His
announcement
today follows last week's sit-in
by House
Democrats. Republicans say their
bill will
block gun sales tied to the
terror watch list
if prosecutors show probable
cause. Democrats
in the Senate blocked a similar
bill last
week.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On Wall Street
today, a third
straight rally. The Dow Jones
industrial average
gained 235 points to close at
17930. The Nasdaq
rose 63 points, and the S&P 500
added 28.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And there's
word the ozone
hole over the South Pole is
getting smaller.
U.S. and British researchers say
the hole
is now about one-fifth smaller
than in the
year 2000. Their report in the
journal "Science"
credits a 1987 treaty on phasing
out chemicals
that deplete ozone. The gas
shields the Earth
from ultraviolet radiation.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Still to come on
the "NewsHour":
the military lifts its ban on
transgender
service members; new insights
into the identities
of the Istanbul Airport bombers;
the U.S.
ambassador to the U.N. on
shaping public perception
of refugees; a Detroit company
that's tied
its own fate to the city; and
much more.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Last summer,
Defense Secretary
Carter declared the military's
ban on transgender
soldiers -- quote -- "outdated."
Carter's announcement today that
transgender
people can serve openly will
impact the estimated
2,500 to 7,000 transgender
soldiers currently
serving, out of a total 1.5
million on active
duty. There are between 1,500
and 4,000 transgender
reservists.
Our John Yang has been reporting
on the new
policy. He joins me now.
So, what's the big impact,
today's announcement?
JOHN YANG: Well, starting today,
transgendered
men and women in the services
can no longer
be kicked out simply for being
transgendered.
The entire policy is going to be
phased in
over a year, but starting in 90
days, medical
services, medical treatments for
transgendered
service people, hormone
treatments, and even
sexual reassignment surgery
itself will be
covered under the military
health care system.
That's a first. They have had to
go outside
the system and pay for it
themselves until
now.
HARI SREENIVASAN: One of the
first things
the secretary said in his speech
was that
he needed access to 100 percent
of the population
to have the best military
possible. What about
the impact on are recruiting,
recruits?
JOHN YANG: Recruits now can go
in if they
are transgendered, if they have
had the reassignment
surgery, sexual reassignment
surgery in the
past.
But they have to certify or have
a doctor
certify that they have been
without distress
or impairment for 18 months.
Now, this is
like any other medical
condition. They're
trying to cut down on lost duty
time. If you
have had knee surgery, you have
got to show
the same proof. If you have had
symptoms of
depression, you have got to show
the same
proof. So this is all treating
it like any
other medical condition now.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Why did it
take so long
since his announcement to now?
JOHN YANG: It was delayed
several months.
We don't quite know why. There
have been reports
about opposition coming from the
top ranks
of the military worried about
unit cohesion,
about military preparedness, and
effectiveness
in battle.
There have been some retired
officers who
have been wondering why what
they call a social
experiment is being done at a
time when you
have got troops deployed around
the world
fighting insurgent forces. But
Secretary Carter
said he spoke to all the uniform
chiefs and
that they are all on board with
this.
HARI SREENIVASAN: You know,
there was also
a kind of moral component to
what he was saying,
that this is the right thing to
do.
JOHN YANG: He quoted the chief
the staff of
the Army, saying that we are
fighting the
-- the men and women in the
armed forces are
fighting for people and they're
open to any
American, and that if they're
willing to fight
and die for it, they ought to
live by it at
all.
HARI SREENIVASAN: This comes at
a time when
even there was a conversation
just recently
about the Marines taking
gender-based titles
out of their force. Right? This
is an active
conversation that is happening
in the military
right now.
JOHN YANG: I mean, this is
something, we think
about it, in the last five
years, you have
had the military open up to gays
serving in
the military serving openly in
the military,
women in combat roles, and now
transgendered
men and women serving openly in
the military.
This has been a huge social
change in a rather
tradition-bound and rather rigid
-- or thought
of as being rigid institution.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And in a
relatively short
period of time.
John Yang, thanks so much.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We return now to
Istanbul and
the aftermath of Tuesday's
deadly airport
attack. More of the dead were
memorialized
today, and larger questions are
being asked
about how Turkey will respond.
From Istanbul, special
correspondent Jane
Ferguson reports.
JANE FERGUSON: Shattered
families have gathered
to bury their loved ones in
funerals across
Istanbul. Many of those killed
on Tuesday's
attack at Ataturk Airport were
Turkish nationals,
leaving behind grieving
relatives and a shocked
country.
At this small high school in the
city, people
gathered to say goodbye to
28-year-old teacher
Hussayn Tunch (ph). He was
waiting for a friend
to arrive when the attackers
struck. His students
are clearly shaken.
STUDENT (through translator): We
first heard
the news from social media and
couldn't believe
it. Then we checked the school
Web site and
found out it was our teacher.
JANE FERGUSON: Police say the
attack was planned
here, a historic neighborhood in
Istanbul
called Fatih. The three suicide
bombers lived
in this second-floor apartment
before that
attack. Turkish news media here
report that
neighbors complained of a
suspicious chemical
odor coming from the building.
The Turkish government says the
three men
were from Russia and the central
Asian countries
of Kyrgyzstan and Uzbekistan,
and that it
was an ISIS operation. Reactions
to Tuesday's
attack reflect how polarized
Turkey's population
is. Some locals in Istanbul told
the "NewsHour"
they don't think the government
is doing everything
it can to keep them safe.
MAN (through translator): I
don't think they
do enough. With this last
attack, there is
not much they can do. They
tried, but they
made it worse. They cannot
control it.
JANE FERGUSON: Others are
staunch defenders
of the government.
MAN (through translator): The
opposition,
they don't know anything. They
just talk.
JANE FERGUSON: Turkey's
president, Recep Tayyip
Erdogan, has been criticized in
the past for
tolerating the Islamic State's
use of the
country as a backdoor into
Syria. ISIS recruits
have often traveled through
Turkey on their
way to join the group. It's an
issue that's
led to backlash in the streets.
WOMAN (through translator): We
think we are
surviving by chance, because the
government
supports ISIS, and innocent
people are killed
as a result. We are here for the
innocent
people who were killed yesterday
at the Ataturk
Airport.
JANE FERGUSON: Now the
government is under
renewed pressure to react to the
attacks,
in part by thawing relations
with Russia.
Erdogan has called for Syria's
President Bashar
al-Assad to step down, and had
been angered
by Russia's support of the
dictator.
Last year, Turkish jets downed a
Russian plane
accused of entering their
airspace from Syria.
But Turkish analysts say Ankara
increasingly
sees Russia as an important
partner, not only
in the fight against ISIS.
BORA BAYRAKTAR, Istanbul Bilgi
University:
Russia provides balance for
Turkey. Turkey
always need a power to balance
European and
American demands.
JANE FERGUSON: Those swings in
alliances continue,
as Syria's war tests country
after country,
and as front-line state Turkey
faces some
of the most daunting challenges
of all.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Jane
Ferguson
in Istanbul, Turkey.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now to my
interview with the
U.S. ambassador to the United
Nations, Samantha
Power.
She was here in Washington
yesterday to speak
on the plight of refugees, now a
record 65
million worldwide. I spoke with
her yesterday
afternoon at the State
Department.
Ambassador Susan Power, thank
you very much
for talking with us.
SAMANTHA POWER, U.S. Ambassador
to the United
Nations: Great to be here.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You are calling
this situation
right now the greatest refugee
crisis the
world has known since World War
II. And yet
you see this rising, enormous
backlash in
Europe, in the United States. It
says that
a lot of people, maybe most
people, don't
share your view about what to
do. How do you
deal with that?
SAMANTHA POWER: Well, I think
there's a lot
of latent public opinion that
also doesn't
necessarily get airtime during
presidential
elections, for instance.
But there are fears. I think
those fears are
stoked. We have seen those in
history at different
times, whether it's on whether
we let in Jewish
refugees during the Second World
War or Vietnamese
refugees after the Vietnam War.
So there's nothing new in that
set of fears.
I think some of the fears are
warranted. People
are wondering, could ISIL
potentially sneak
through? And we have to answer
those fears.
And I think we have by putting
in place these
incredibly strenuous vetting
processes that
have the FBI and the Center for
Counterterrorism
and the Department of Homeland
Security at
the table vetting the time it
takes.
But we also need to do a better
job lifting
up, I think, the voices of those
people who,
again, aren't necessarily
running for office,
but who have welcomed refugees
into their
homes, into their communities,
or giving small
amounts of money, donating toys.
And I see
that all over the place in going
to meet with
refugees around the country, is
just how much
generosity there is at the same
time.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But you also see,
of course,
the vote in the United Kingdom
to leave the
E.U., the Brexit vote. You see
Chancellor
Merkel in Germany facing
growing, significant
opposition.
This has become a political
crisis or problem,
as much as a humanitarian one.
How much harder
does that make it for you?
SAMANTHA POWER: Clearly, there
are difficult
politics associated with this
issue.
I think we have to be a little
careful to
choose -- to pull out of Brexit
one thing
and say, wow, those people voted
that way
because of the Syrian refugee
crisis or because
of displacement. I mean, there
were concerns,
of course, that we saw in exit
polls and heard
from people about immigration,
so I don't
dismiss the point at all.
But, you know, I think that part
of what is
making people feel a little
overwhelmed now,
just by reading the newspaper,
is a sense
of an uncontrolled flow, just
people tumbling
over borders. And that's also
where the security
fears -- people are asking,
well, could -- among
that population of ISIL in
Syria, couldn't
they be smuggled into that very
large number
of people?
And what we're trying to do is
to say we have
systems here. We have processes.
In order
for those systems to work, there
has to be
burden-sharing. It has to be
more equitable.
It can't just be falling to
Turkey to take
three million Syrians, and then
have countries
washing their hands of an
obligation to take
any.
If there's a way to -- and it's
very difficult
to do, but to sort of slow down
the process,
to make sure that the screening
and the procedures
are in place, to be sure that
communities
are ready to absorb refugees
when they land,
because there's nothing worse
than the volatility
of an unready community, you
know, meeting
an influx of families who have
gone through
so much.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But it sounds
like what you're
saying is you're calling on
leaders to go
against the popular will in
their countries,
because there are these -- as
you just said,
there are very real concerns in
this country
that so many of these refugees
may be terrorists
hiding or pretending to be
somebody else.
SAMANTHA POWER: This is an issue
that has
proven divisive, there's no
question.
But I, again, draw on the number
of mayors
and local officials and school
board heads
who -- and private sector CEOs
who have gone
out of their way in this country
to say we
want refugees. We have seen how
refugees work.
We have seen how they enrich our
community.
So, I think, again, we just --
we just have
to know that there's more
beneath the surface
than necessarily meets the eye.
JUDY WOODRUFF: At the same time,
Americans
-- many Americans are looking at
this from
a -- frankly, a more parochial
standpoint.
They're thinking these people
may be taking
jobs away from us. They may be
presenting
a very real security threat to
us right now.
Can you guarantee the American
people those
things aren't going to happen?
SAMANTHA POWER: Well, what I can
say is that,
since September 11, we have
taken 800,000
people into this country in our
resettlement
program and not one of them has
been involved
in domestic terrorism.
What I can say is that our
system for screening
refugees is the most robust of
any for anybody
coming into the country, and
that Syrian refugees
get an added layer of vetting
because of the
proximity, of course, with a
battleground
and with ISIL.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You're probably
the person
in this administration at a high
level most
identified with the humanitarian
cause, certainly
because of all the work you did
on humanitarian
issues before you came into the
administration.
How do you square that with what
has to be,
I mean, from your perspective, a
disappointing
response on the part of the
U.S.? I guess
the U.S. at this point has taken
in just a
few thousand...
SAMANTHA POWER: Syrians.
JUDY WOODRUFF: ... Syrian --
Syrian refugees
out of over -- of millions.
SAMANTHA POWER: Yes. Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How do you
reconcile that personally?
SAMANTHA POWER: Well, I
reconcile it in part
because nobody is the more vocal
champion
of enhancing our support for
refugees than
the president I get to work for
every day.
So we have now increased the
number of refugees
we're taking this year to
85,000, including
10,000 Syrians. We are
increasing next year
then to 100,000. That is a 40
percent increase
in just a two-year period of
time. We have
got to make sure the system is
ready, and
that we can do the vetting
consistent with
our primary responsibility,
which is to keep
the American people safe.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Of course, the
root cause of
the most of the Syrian refugee
crisis is the
war ongoing there. And just
recently, a number
of U.S. diplomats wrote a letter
to Secretary
Kerry saying they want the U.S.
very much
to take a more aggressive
military role in
that war.
How do you -- what's your
feeling about that?
SAMANTHA POWER: The views
expressed in that
cable are views and policy
positions that
have been taken in meetings I'm
in, in meetings
the president has chaired. I
mean, he welcomes
that kind of debate.
If we were able to present
something that
makes a compelling case, where,
you know,
the benefits in terms of ending
the Syrian
war are going to exceed the
costs, he's going
to embrace that. And there's not
an option
that's been presented, again,
that he hasn't
embraced, you know, that if
somebody presents
it in a manner where it is
compelling and
actually looks like it's going
to solve the
problem, he's going to be all
over it.
And to this day, even with the
short time
left in his tenure, we are still
looking to
end the war, and we are still
being encouraged
to look under every rock.
JUDY WOODRUFF: U.S. Ambassador
to the United
Nations Samantha Power, thank
you very much.
SAMANTHA POWER: Thank you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": a
deeper look
into why some voters don't trust
Hillary Clinton;
the untold story of women
mathematicians who
launched the U.S. into space;
and Tig Notaro's
take on healing through comedy.
But, first: how a small company
in Detroit
is trying to bring more
manufacturing of a
different kind back to the Motor
City.
In fact, the company is branding
its products
as built in Detroit. But what
does that really
mean?
Special correspondent Roben
Farzad has the
story, part of our series on
business and
economics, Making Sense, which
airs Thursdays.
ROBEN FARZAD: Shinola's flagship
store in
Midtown Detroit showcases
hand-made leather
goods, bicycles constructed on
site, and,
of course, watches, the product
that put this
luxury brand on the map.
When you look at your marketing
research for,
say, a 40-something with some
money to spend
walks into a store, and aspires
to buy a Shinola
watch, what is that person
buying?
JACQUES PANIS, President,
Shinola: First and
foremost, a high-quality time
piece that has
a story behind it
ROBEN FARZAD: President Jacques
Panis says
that story is about Detroit, a
city that got
hit especially hard by a
financial crisis
that saw Washington bailing out
General Motors.
Adding insult, the NFL's Lions
went winless,
the city's mayor was indicted,
and Detroit
later filed for the biggest
bankruptcy in
municipal history. Even so, five
years ago,
Shinola set up shop here in a
former GM lab.
JACQUES PANIS: It's a city that
is going to
be one of the great stories of
our country.
And, yes, it fell on hard times.
And we at
Shinola have come to this city
and have been
a small part of this
revitalization.
ROBEN FARZAD: The company has
created almost
400 jobs here, 240 in
manufacturing. Mesha
McCoy was laid off by a car
parts maker in
2009.
This feels much less kind of
what I imagine
manufacturing to be. It's a
clean room. We're
wearing, you know, smocks and
we're wearing
things over our shoes.
MESHA MCCOY, Shinola: I like it
because, when
we come in, we're clean, and
when we leave,
we're clean. At the auto --
automotive industry,
it was the total opposite. Go in
clean, you
leave out dirty. So, I love it.
ROBEN FARZAD: McCoy was one of
the first workers
on the movement assembly line.
MESHA MCCOY: I didn't know
anything about
a watch, but to know how to set
it.
ROBEN FARZAD: Titus Hayes used
to work on
dashboards for Chrysler. He too
was among
Shinola's first hires.
TITUS HAYES, Shinola: They
helped us assemble
the movements and they trained
us piece by
piece, step by step how to
assemble movements,
until we can do it on our own.
ROBEN FARZAD: The workers on the
floor earn
$13.50-$15.50 an hour. This
year, they will
churn out 225,000 watches.
They're also ramping
up production of leather
passport covers,
key fobs and journal covers.
LISA COOK, Michigan State
University: This
is the future of manufacturing.
ROBEN FARZAD: Michigan State
University economist
Lisa Cook says the days when
Detroit manufacturers
employed 200,000 are gone. But
there is a
future for smaller, niche
operations like
Shinola.
LISA COOK: We can expect that
many different
types of novelty products might
be produced,
ones that require high skills
like Shinola
watches, and these goods, and
goods like them,
represent that kind of comeback.
WOMAN: Detroit is and always has
been an amazing
place to be.
ROBEN FARZAD: Shinola has
closely aligned
itself with the resilience of
Detroit and
the revival of American
manufacturing. As
a result, it's won some famous
fans, like
presidents past and present and
movie stars.
BEN AFFLECK, Actor: I got this
Shinola watch
in Detroit. Any time you can
contribute in
any way to that city, it's -- it
feels good.
ROBEN FARZAD: Billionaire sports
and tech
mogul Ted Leonsis invested $25
million in
Shinola's parent company,
Bedrock. Why? He
saw more and more young people
buying products
with meaning.
TED LEONSIS, Founder, Revolution
Growth: Millennials
really wanted the ability to not
only badge,
wear something of high quality,
fairly priced,
beautifully made, like my
Shinola watch right
here, but equally, as
importantly, to be able
to support your community and
your neighbors.
ROBEN FARZAD: Shinola founder
Tom Kartsotis,
who made his fortune building
Fossil watches,
named his company after an old
shoe-polish
brand that came up in
conversation one day.
TED LEONSIS: When Tom talked to
his lawyer
and told him, I'm going to do a
moonshot,
I'm going to build the next
great company
to put people to work, he said,
you don't
know no (EXPLETIVE DELETED) from
Shinola about
doing that. And he said, what is
Shinola?
And went online and...
ROBEN FARZAD: Is that
apocryphal? That's real?
TED LEONSIS: Yes, and ended up
buying the
brand kind of a little tweak and
fun, you
know, you're probably right. I
don't know
what we're doing around this,
but let's go
for it.
ROBEN FARZAD: Though it has yet
to turn a
profit, Shinola made $100
million in revenue
last year, up from $60 million
the year before.
But Shinola has its critics, who
point out
that it's owned by a company in
Texas, not
Detroit.
Aaron Foley is the author of
"How to Live
in Detroit Without Being a
Jackass."
AARON FOLEY, Author, "How to
Live in Detroit
Without Being a Jackass": It
seemed like overnight
they were talked about in the
same, you know,
breath with Ford, GM, and not
just them, Motown,
all of these things that are so
iconic and
historic to Detroit.
Who's to say that, you know,
once the luster
of the coolness of Detroit wears
off, Shinola
won't, you know, pull up their
stakes and
go to Toledo or Cleveland or
whatever the
next hot Rust Belt, Midwest city
on the rise
is?
ROBEN FARZAD: Detroit writer Jon
Moy believes
Shinola is exploiting Detroit's
travails to
make money.
Jon, come on. Detroit, jobs,
happy workers,
revival, renaissance, leather
watches, how
could you have any beef with
that?
JON MOY, Writer: I don't think I
have a beef
with jobs. I don't think I have
a beef with
new things, but, I mean, I think
it's a valid
criticism to say that they have
sort of co-opted
this city and the struggle of
the city and
sort of commodified it in a way
that most
companies I think would be
reticent.
ROBEN FARZAD: Case in point,
this ad for a
new watch which ran soon after
Detroit filed
for bankruptcy, and this tweet.
JON MOY: You know, "Bankruptcy
schmankruptcy."
Yes, I don't think a lot of
people here would
sort of respond the same to the
city canceling
pensions and retirement plans
and benefits.
To sort of use it to sell luxury
goods, and
it's, I think, at least
problematic, you know,
and, at worst, it's cynical and
manipulative.
ROBEN FARZAD: Washington has
also weighed
in. The Federal Trade Commission
recently
told Shinola to stop using the
slogan "Where
American Is Made," because so
many parts come
from overseas.
Panis says built in Detroit will
now be qualified.
JACQUES PANIS: Built in Detroit,
with Swiss
and imported parts.
ROBEN FARZAD: The company argues
the FTC regulations
are too strict since many
components are not
even available here.
TED LEONSIS: Swiss companies are
able to say
made in Switzerland, even though
they're bringing
parts in from China and around.
There's a
globalization for manufacturing
companies.
ROBEN FARZAD: Lisa Cook gets the
criticism,
but she thinks ultimately
Shinola is a boon
for Detroit.
LISA COOK: I am an economist. I
am a macroeconomist.
I will take growth any way you
can get it.
Even if it's not sort of made
wholly in Detroit,
it's made enough in Detroit.
Open more manufacturing
stores like this, more
manufacturing outlets
like this. There are niche
products that people
want to buy. So, why not supply
those consumers
who want these goods? And why
not have these
goods come from Detroit?
ROBEN FARZAD: The Shinola brand
seems to enjoy
goodwill among the locals we
bumped into.
Would you get a Shinola watch?
Are you interested
in that brand?
MAN: I got two Shinola watches.
ROBEN FARZAD: You do?
MAN: Two of them.
WOMAN: If they have good
quality, that says
that Detroit has quality
workers. Then people
will buy them and bring Detroit
some more
shine.
MAN: I wanted to get one of the
bikes, but
they're kind of expensive. It's
Detroit, though,
you know?
ROBEN FARZAD: What that
ultimately means,
only time will tell.
For the "PBS NewsHour" I'm Roben
Farzad reporting
from Detroit.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now to the 2016
campaign for
the White House, as we get
closer to the national
party conventions.
Impressions of both Hillary
Clinton and Donald
Trump have begun to take hold in
the minds
of more and more voters, some
positive and
some less so.
In our ongoing effort to look at
not only
the candidates' positions on the
issues, but
also at their personalities and
character
traits, we take a look tonight
at voters'
perceptions of Clinton.
The "NewsHour"'s Lisa Desjardins
begins our
report.
LISA DESJARDINS: This past
Monday, Hillary
Clinton directly confronted a
perception that
has dogged her.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
A lot of people tell pollsters
they don't
trust me. Now, I don't like
hearing that,
and I have thought a lot about
what is behind
it.
LISA DESJARDINS: It's something
even Democratic
voters have expressed, as from
this Sanders
supporters in New York back in
April.
MAN: First of all, she's lying
about Benghazi.
She's lying about her e-mails.
LISA DESJARDINS: Recent polls
such as this
week's NBC/Wall Street Journal
survey back
up the anecdotes; 69 percent of
those polled
said they're concerned by
criticism that Clinton
has a -- quote -- "record of
being dishonest."
Just 28 percent said that wasn't
a concern
for them.
Enter the Republican
nominee-to-be, Donald
Trump. He has his own polling
negatives, but
he's pouncing on the Clinton
trust gap.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
Most people know she's a
world-class liar.
Just look at her pathetic e-mail
server statements.
LISA DESJARDINS: Some point to
her time in
the White House and the
investigation into
both Clintons' investments in
Arkansas property
known as Whitewater as the
origin of questions
about her trustworthiness.
But Clinton defenders say this
is pure politics,
the drawback of a nearly
four-decade-long
career, this from one Iowa voter
in January.
BEN SCHRAG, Iowa Resident: I
think you can't
be a candidate who has been in
the public
eye for as long as Hillary has,
and not have
something that can be sort of
picked apart.
LISA DESJARDINS: The candidate
insists she
is a victim of politics and
misunderstanding.
She says she's ready to confront
the issue.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: You
can't just talk
someone into trusting you. You
have got to
earn it.
LISA DESJARDINS: For the "PBS
NewsHour," I'm
Lisa Desjardins.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We explore this
question of
trust with Anne Gearan. She
covers the Clinton
campaign for The Washington
Post. Democratic
pollster Peter Hart, founder of
Hart Research.
And strategist Ann Lewis, she's
a Hillary
Clinton supporter who has known
the candidate
for more than two decades.
Welcome, all three of you, back
to the program.
ANNE GEARAN, The Washington
Post: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Anne Gearan, to
you first.
You do follow the Clinton
campaign very closely.
How serious do they view this
issue, this
question of trustworthiness?
ANNE GEARAN: Well, I think you
get a measure
of how serious and persistent an
issue, a
problem this is for Clinton by
the fact that
she took time out of an
otherwise unrelated
event earlier this week to
address it, which
was, you know, on Monday at an
otherwise civil
rights-themed event, she kind of
made an aside
to say, before a friendly
audience, that she
understood that people have
questions and
doubts about her
trustworthiness, and that
she's trying to work to address
those.
She's trying to neutralize it
and cauterize
that the best she can at the
start of the
general election campaign,
because it's something
that stuck with her throughout
the primary
and appears to be primed to be a
major topic
during the general.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now, Peter Hart,
based on the
polling you have done over the
years, especially
this year, talking to voters,
what do you
see?
PETER HART, Democratic Pollster:
It's a big
problem. I mean, this is our
NBC/Wall Street
Journal poll, and we asked
people to use their
own words when they hear the
word President
Hillary Clinton. What comes to
mind?
And you can see the biggest word
there is
trustworthy, liar, and all of
this. There
are lots of good things to say
about her,
but the biggest problem and
challenge that
she has is, how do you overcome
the integrity
problem?
JUDY WOODRUFF: And this is
unprompted or prompted?
PETER HART: Unprompted. In other
words, this
-- they can choose any word.
People say, I
want to select a woman. They
like that very
much. They think she's
competent. But the
biggest hurdle for her is
integrity.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Ann Lewis, again,
as somebody
who has known Hillary Clinton
for a very long
time, why do you think -- how --
it's a recurring
issue. Why is that? How do you
see it?
ANN LEWIS, Former Clinton
Adviser: Well, as
Hillary has said, she knows it.
She doesn't
like it. She knows it. She knows
she has to
work harder to earn people's
trust.
But, look, Judy, it is not a
coincidence that
we're having this conversation
the day after
the Benghazi committee report
comes out. We
have had 25 years of partisan
attacks on Hillary.
Every one of them eventually is
disproved,
it's discharged. But they leave
a residue.
So, the Benghazi report, which
was the seventh,
looking at this tragedy where
people had died,
and yet it's being used for
partisan purposes,
really to bludgeon her. The
report comes out
and says, no, no wrongdoing,
front page, right,
cleared of any wrongdoing, and
yet her opponents
are using it again as a way to
attack her.
So, yes, she has work to do, as
she has said.
She knows she's made some
mistakes, but the
most important thing she can do
is tell people,
I'm going to work hard on your
behalf. You
can count on me.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Peter, what do
you see, again,
in the research and the focus
groups that's
at the source of this? What's
causing people
to have this lack of trust?
PETER HART: Well, what's
fascinating is exactly
what Ann says. It's not a single
event.
It's not as though Hillary
Clinton can go
to the nation and say, I want to
direct and
-- address this directly. The
problem is there
are a host of things that go
back over 25
years. So, there's not
necessarily...
JUDY WOODRUFF: Like what? I
mean, what...
(CROSSTALK)
PETER HART: Well, you can go
back to Whitewater
that they talk about. They can
talk about
all of the elements, whether
it's Benghazi,
whether it's the speaking fees
at Wall Street.
All of those things become
challenges, and
they build upon one another. So,
as Ann said,
maybe she's answered each and
every one of
these things, but there's not a
sense of transparency.
There's not a sense of she's
opened all the
books and done all those things.
So that's
what's hanging out there. It's
not a single
specific.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Anne Gearan, you
have also
talked to voters. You don't just
talk to people
in the campaign. What do you see
coming through
voters and what is at the source
of this?
ANNE GEARAN: Well, it's
interesting that you
mention the speaking fee issue.
This is something that we heard
an awful lot
about throughout the primary,
and it wasn't
a partisan attack, in the sense
that it didn't
come from Republicans primarily.
It came from
Democrats. It came from Bernie
supporters.
It came from liberal Democrats
concerned that
Clinton was revealing that she
was too close
to Wall Street, point one, and
that she felt
-- it seemed to them that she
had something
to hide by not releasing the
transcripts of
those conversations and not
being willing
to talk in great detail about
what she had
said in those closed-door
sessions.
So that -- it's the two things.
It's that
she, you know, has made
decisions that people
disagree with, going back
decades, and, in
this case, not that long ago,
and whether
she's being truthful and
forthcoming in the
aftermath in describing those.
That particular incident was of
great interest
to us, because it showed that
she, even at
a time when it was pretty
obvious that she
was going to run for president,
made decisions
that in -- really pretty clearly
were going
to make her look as if she could
potentially,
you know, have something to
hide, that there
was a political -- there was
going to be a
political cost to that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Ann Lewis,
basically, your
point is that it's not fair,
it's just the
accumulation of a number of
negative stories.
But, having said that, does
Hillary Clinton,
do the people around her
understand or -- I
mean, how do they think they
turn this around?
How do they deal with it?
ANN LEWIS: Let me be clear, life
may not be
fair, but you deal with what's
there.
And Hillary says and knows she
has -- she
has to work hard in this
campaign, again,
to earn people's trust, to say
to them, here's
my record of what I have done.
You can count
on me. You can count on me to
fight for you.
Look, nobody I know would say,
honey, who
could you count on to fight for
children?
Well, look at Hillary Clinton's
record, and
here is what she will do. So,
this isn't something
you address with rhetoric.
You do it with action. You do it
with commitment,
and you do it in Hillary's case
by pointing
out what she has done throughout
her life.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Peter Hart,
again, as
somebody who has looked at a lot
of different
campaigns, is this something
that a candidate
can turn around? Is this one of
those things
that you can go out there and
make the opposite
argument? What are the options
for Hillary
Clinton?
PETER HART: Well, I think the
options are
to get back to -- Hillary
Clinton, I see as
sort of a great antique desk
that has been
painted over a million times,
and if you could
just strip away all of that,
she'd have a
much better chance.
And I don't think it's on
integrity. I think
it is on being easygoing and
likable, her
friendships, her depth, all of
those things.
People think of her as
competent. They don't
trust her. But they don't like
her at this
stage of the game. That's the
thing that she
needs to deal with.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So how does she
-- is this
the kind of thing a candidate
can change?
PETER HART: Of course they can.
I mean, it
just is, as much as anything,
all of her friendships.
Those things need to get across.
Somehow, she needs to be able to
have that
nice interchange, which she can
do so well.
Everything is too much of a
platform. You
don't get that easygoing
qualities that you
can see. And if you create that,
then I think
integrity becomes a subpart,
instead of the
major part.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Anne Gearan, in
talking to
the campaign, do you sense they
have a strategy,
that they recognize -- as we
pointed out,
Hillary Clinton herself
addressed this, this
week, but what do they do going
forward about
it?
ANNE GEARAN: Well, I mean, the
strategy appears
to be two main things, talk
about it, confront
it, acknowledge it. It is a
problem, she's
saying, and here's what I'm
going to do about
it. I'm going to try to work
hard and earn
your trust.
That's point one she's doing.
The other thing,
I think -- I have been surprised
we haven't
talked about yet, which is, yes,
people don't
like her. Yes, people say she is
untrustworthy,
but in the same polling, people
say they don't
like Donald Trump more.
And the second part of that
strategy is to
play on people's dislike and
distrust of Donald
Trump, and to try to flesh that
out with data
points from his business
background, which
you see not only Clinton and her
campaign
doing, but all of the arrayed
super PACs doing
on her behalf right now, rolling
out people
who were victimized -- say they
were victimized
by Trump, trying to show where
he stiffed
contractors at his Atlantic City
hotels and
all the rest.
That is a different way of
getting at the
question of trustworthiness and,
you know,
believability, and that's how
they're going
to try to advance her, by
attacking him.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Compared to what?
(LAUGHTER)
ANNE GEARAN: Right. Exactly.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, we have got
four-and-a-half
months to go. And we will
continue to watch
this unfold.
Anne Gearan.
ANNE GEARAN: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Peter Hart, Ann
Lewis, thank
you all. Appreciate it.
ANN LEWIS: Thank you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now the next
addition to
our summer reading list.
It's a look at some unsung
American heroes
in the space race, the women
behind the scenes.
At the recent Los Angeles Book
Festival, Jeffrey
Brown sat down with Nathalia
Holt, the author
of "Rise of the Rocket Girls:
The Women Who
Propelled Us, from Missiles to
the Moon to
Mars."
JEFFREY BROWN: Tell me, who were
the rocket
girls?
NATHALIA HOLT, Author, "Rise of
the Rocket
Girls: The Women Who Propelled
Us, from Missiles
to the Moon to Mars": They are
these unsung
heroes who have touched just
about every NASA
mission that you can think of.
And yet they were mostly
forgotten by NASA
and by the Jet Propulsion Lab,
which is where
they worked. These women worked
as computers.
And so, before all of the
digital devices
we have today...
JEFFREY BROWN: Now, wait a
minute. Explain
that, because I know they're
called literally
computers.
NATHALIA HOLT: This is their job
title.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
NATHALIA HOLT: You actually
needed humans
to be able to do the
calculations.
And so this is what they started
out working
as. So, they only had pencil and
paper, and
these really loud mechanical
calculators that
couldn't do very much. And, from
that, they
were able to calculate an
incredible number
of trajectories for spacecraft,
propellants.
JEFFREY BROWN: So they are
literally computing
and called computers.
NATHALIA HOLT: Exactly, yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: Before the age
that we are
now living in.
NATHALIA HOLT: But then, once
the first IBMs
came in, then they became the
first computer
programmers in the lab.
JEFFREY BROWN: What kind of
backgrounds did
they come from that brought them
into this?
NATHALIA HOLT: So, they come
from different
backgrounds. Many of them have
only had high
school degrees. But they were
exceptionally
good at math. So, they were
often the only
girls in their math classes, but
they would
-- they loved math. They would
take as much
as they could.
But they're weren't very many
options for
women then. Mostly, if you loved
math, if
you loved science, your options
still were
nurse, teacher, secretary. And
so, by becoming
a computer, they could get
around this and
have a job in science.
JEFFREY BROWN: Give us an
example, someone
that you came to know and love,
because you
told these individual stories,
right?
NATHALIA HOLT: I did. I found
these women
and I loved speaking with them.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes. Yes.
NATHALIA HOLT: A wonderful
example is Barbara
Paulson. Today, she is turning
88. She has
a birthday. And she started in
the lab when
she was 19. She had her high
school degree
and loved math. And she had an
incredible,
long career. She had a 45-year
career at NASA,
working on all of these
different missions.
JEFFREY BROWN: What kind of
limitations do
they run up against?
NATHALIA HOLT: These women, they
were obviously
paid less than the men, and
their responsibilities
increased as the time went by,
but still they
had many setbacks.
And, of course, there was sexism
there, as
there is today in science, so
they had to
cope with that. But, in general,
they loved
their careers, they loved their
time at NASA,
and really had such a big
contribution.
JEFFREY BROWN: You described
them sort of
joining -- sort of like forming
a club. I
suppose that they almost had to.
NATHALIA HOLT: They really
relied on each
other.
They had -- so they became this
all-woman
group because of Macie Roberts.
So she was
the first supervisor of the
computers. She
was made supervisor in 1942, and
so she is
the one that decided it should
be all women,
even though men did apply, but
she wanted
it to be a close-knit group of
girls.
JEFFREY BROWN: She kept out the
men?
NATHALIA HOLT: She did, on
purpose.
JEFFREY BROWN: Now, that's an
interesting
-- so a reverse discrimination
in a sense.
NATHALIA HOLT: Yes.
And then this actually continued
for decades.
Then their friends, as well as
co-workers,
they had just spent so much time
together,
often all night during missions.
They were
there for days sometimes in some
of these
missions.
And there were also some
concerns that a male
wouldn't do as well taking
directions from
a female boss.
JEFFREY BROWN: But what kind of
things were
they working on?
NATHALIA HOLT: There are
thrilling moments.
One of my favorite is during
Explorer 1, which
is the first American satellite.
And here
you have Barbara Paulson, who is
in the control
room that night. She has worked
in the lab
for a decade already. And so she
had been
hard at work making this moment
possible,
getting all of the rockets to
this point.
And she is the one calculating
the trajectory
that night. So, when the first
American satellite
is a success, its because of
her. She is the
one that found out it's actually
in orbit.
JEFFREY BROWN: Did she get her
due? Did she
get -- did people understand it
at the time?
NATHALIA HOLT: This is a very
sad part of
the book, is that, although she
was celebrated
then, and she had a room full of
people who
were so excited by what she had
accomplished,
what I found is that much of
that was forgotten.
So, in 2008, NASA held a gala in
celebration
of Explorer 1 for the 50th
anniversary. And
none of the women who worked on
that project,
who were even in mission control
that night,
were invited. And this is a very
sad thing.
JEFFREY BROWN: This is in 2008.
NATHALIA HOLT: Yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: So the awareness
has not changed
at all?
NATHALIA HOLT: Yes, it is very
sad.
But my hope is that, now, they
will finally
get the recognition that they
deserve.
JEFFREY BROWN: We do a lot of
talking on our
program looking at the problem
of young girls,
young women, women getting into
and then staying
in, staying with sciences.
NATHALIA HOLT: Yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: What do you see
happening?
NATHALIA HOLT: It's a desperate
time for women
in technology.
JEFFREY BROWN: A desperate time?
NATHALIA HOLT: Absolutely.
So, in 1987 -- 1984 -- excuse me
-- 37 percent
of bachelor's degrees in
computer sciences
were awarded to women. And today
that number
is 18 percent. So it's a huge
drop.
JEFFREY BROWN: Why do you think
that's happened?
NATHALIA HOLT: Some of the
reasons are education.
Some of them have to do with the
lack of role
models that young women can see,
they can
see a reflection of themselves
in computer
science.
But it's important that we
address this, because
even for the women in science
today, we're
seeing that about half of the
women leave
mid-career.
What I like about the stories of
these women,
the Rocket Girls, is that they
were able to
get over many of these hurdles
through -- it
wasn't typical for women to be
mothers and
scientist at this time. And they
were able
to accomplish that.
JEFFREY BROWN: What about in the
space program
itself? The situation for women
has -- well,
it has changed dramatically from
the period
you're writing about.
NATHALIA HOLT: It has changed
dramatically.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
NATHALIA HOLT: Yes.
So what we are seeing is that
for women astronauts,
this is an amazing time. We're
saying half
of the class of astronauts at
NASA today are
women.
JEFFREY BROWN: I read that half
of the class,
yes, yes. That's striking.
NATHALIA HOLT: Yes.
And this is an incredible
accomplishment.
And we should all be very proud
of this. But
for the engineers who are part
of the space
agency, it is a different story.
And it's
one that we need to make sure
that we are
bolstering these women and
encouraging girls
today to go into the sciences.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right, the
"Rise of the
Rocket Girls."
Nathalia Holt, thank you so
much.
NATHALIA HOLT: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now to another in
our Brief
But Spectacular series, where we
ask interesting
people to describe their
passions.
Tonight, we hear from comedian
Tig Notaro,
who has used her performances to
overcome
enormous personal hurdles,
including a cancer
diagnoses and the loss of her
mother.
Her memoir, "I'm Just a Person,"
came out
earlier this month.
TIG NOTARO, Comedian: In 2012, I
was so busy.
I was filming a movie, shooting
a TV pilot.
Then I started to get sick, and
I got diagnosed
with pneumonia. A few days
later, my mother
tripped and hit her head and
died.
My girlfriend at the time, she
and I split
up. And then I was diagnosed
with invasive
bilateral breast cancer.
During that time period, I kept
hearing, "God
never gives you more than you
can handle."
That was way more than I could
handle.
I would hear brave and battling
and all of
these words that I didn't know
that I really
related to. And I kept picturing
the military
hearing about this brave person
and just kicking
my door down and coming in to
find me just
crying on my couch for my mommy,
and them
being like: Yes, there she is.
We need you
on the front lines. There's the
brave one.
That diagnosis just sent me
spiraling, but
also I felt more prolific than
ever. I started
writing nonstop. And I had a
show coming up.
I knew I need an opening line
that was going
to crack the tension. I had this
thought that
went through my head picturing
myself walking
out, saying:
Good evening. Hello. I have
cancer. How are
you? Hi. How are you? Is
everyone having a
good time? I have cancer. How
are you?
There were so many mixed
responses, from just
stunned silence, to
uncomfortable laughing,
to crying.
To some degree, I was asking for
help, even
while I was trying to make light
of it.
When I had a double mastectomy,
I didn't have
reconstructive surgery, and I
don't have nipples.
And it was -- you know, it was a
struggle
getting comfortable with myself.
But when
I really thought about how it
was just my
skin growing together with my
skin and healing
me, why is that uncomfortable or
shameful
or embarrassing or something to
hide?
If somebody has a scar on their
face, nobody's
like, hey, you need to cover
that. That's
hard to look at. After I really
healed and
was comfortable with my body and
was back
touring in front of audiences, I
kept thinking,
oh, my God, I could take my
shirt off right
now and blow these people's
minds.
I couldn't take it any longer,
and I just
had to -- I had to remove my
shirt.
People say things to me now, oh,
this is so
empowering for women and cancer
survivors,
and -- absolutely. It's really
more about
just being human beings. And
this is our body.
And who cares?
My name is Tig Notaro, and this
is my Brief
But Spectacular take on healing
through comedy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And she took our
breath away
a little bit there.
You can watch more of our Brief
But Spectacular
episodes on our Web site,
PBS.org/NewsHour/Brief.
Also online, we share another
special science
bedtime story. It tells the
incredible tale
of the spacecraft that flew to
Pluto and of
a little girl who loved space
and grew up
to become one of the mission's
lead engineers.
All that and more is on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Tune in later
tonight on
"Charlie Rose": New York Times
columnist and
author Tom Friedman weighs in on
both the
Brexit and the race for the
White House.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
On Friday: why Polish immigrants
in England
fear for their safety after
Brexit.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening. For all of us at the
"PBS NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.